%%
%% Template abstract.tex
%%

\chapter*{Abstract}
\label{cha:abstract}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Abstract}

Throughout this thesis, I investigate two long-standing yet
rarely explored sequence learning challenges under the
Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGMs) framework: learning
multi-timescale representations on a single sequence and learning
higher-order dynamics between multi-sequences. The first
challenge is tackled with Hidden Markov Models (HMMs), a type of
directed PGMs, under the reinforcement learning framework. I
prove that the Semi-Markov Decision Problem (SMDP) formulated
option framework
\cite{sutton1999between,bacon2017option,zhang2019dac}, one of the
most promising Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL)
frameworks, has a Markov Decision Problem (MDP) equivalence.
Based on this equivalence, a simple yet effective Skill-Action
(SA) architecture is proposed. Our empirical studies on
challenging robot simulation environments demonstrate that SA
significantly outperforms all baselines on both infinite horizon
and transfer learning environments. Because of its exceptional
scalability, SA gives rise to a large scale pre-training
architecture in reinforcement learning. The second challenge is
tackled with Markov Random Fields (MRFs), also known as
undirected PGMs, under the supervised learning framework. I
employ binary MRFs with weighted Lower Linear Envelope Potentials
(LLEPs) to capture higher-order dependencies. I propose an exact
inference algorithm under the graph-cuts framework and an
efficient learning algorithm under the Latent Structural Support
Vector Machines (LSSVMs) framework. In order to learn
higher-order latent dynamics on time series, we layer multi-task
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) on top of Markov random fields
(MRFs). A sub-gradient algorithm is employed to perform
end-to-end training. We conduct thorough empirical studies on
three popular Chinese stock market indexes and the proposed
method outperforms all baselines. To our best knowledge, the
proposed technique is the first to investigate higher-order
dynamics between stocks.

%%% Local Variables: 
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "thesis"
%%% End: 
